That tape didn't run its full 30 minutes, which is
all right. You're sure you're getting a
recording, aren't you? Because it's not so
irritating as to record and get nothing. That's
right. I'm sure I am. We can check that out. All
right, as long as you're sure. Well, anyway, as I
say, my wife suggested to him that he ought to do
something about the fireplace and get it
enlarged. And a week or two later, he came round and
said, my wife asked him whether he'd done
anything. He said, yes, I've done something. She,
from the wording of it, she was a little
suspicious. She said, what have you done, Harold?
Well, he said, there are two ways of keeping warm in
a room. One is to have a larger fireplace, and the
other is to get closer to it. And he said, what I've
done is I've had the curb around the fireplace put
closer to the fireplace, so that I always sit on the
floor, and I can now get closer to it, and the heat
goes off as the inverse square, so I shall keep
warm. But anyway, he took to coming round almost
every evening to the apartment we had in
Cambridge. He'd stand out in the street and shout
until we let him in. So we had this, what I regarded
as an old gentleman. He was only in his 40s, but I was
in my early 20s. And he used to come round and talk
about geophysics and so on. I learnt a lot from him.
Well, then my main thing was I decided to widen the
ranges Essentially, the thing was called the
Department of Geodesy and Geophysics, but it was
really only concerned with lecturing to
undergraduates on surveying and measuring
gravity. And I started off to add seismology. And
we also added a little terrestrial magnetism. I
made gravity measurements when I was in East
Africa. and the seismology was a big project. And
then I met this character, Dick Field, who said, I
must go to sea and do some seismology at sea. And he
arranged for me in 1937 to go out to sea with Maurice
Huey. This is the first time I'd been to America. I
came to America in the summer of 1937, and I went out
to sea with the Coastal Geodetic Survey. I went...
around the east coast with field we were driving
down i remember to see the geophysical lab in
washington and i said you know i'm sorry always
sorry that as a student i never did any geology oh
it's absurd you must learn some geology come on
we'll go and learn some geology um and we rushed off
instead of going to the geophysical lab in
washington we rushed off in the other direction
And he took me over the Appalachian section in
which he'd done his PhD between Harrisburg and the
Belfonte up to State College. This wonderful,
beautiful section through a slightly folded
mountain range. And he showed me what geology was
about. He really did teach me enough geology to
know what it was about and to make me believe I can
make up the rest. Anyway, then he sent me out to sea
with Ewing, and Ewing, by this time, he'd been
doing some work on the continental shelf, and this
was his first foray beyond the edge of the
continental shelf. And I've given an account of
this in the thing I wrote about Ewing.
And we had a most interesting time in this little
vessel. She was a sailing vessel, an auxiliary
engine, the Atlantis from Woods Hole. And this was
my first trip in an oceanographic vessel. My
trouble as an oceanographer has always been that
I'm seasick. And these little vessels didn't
really suit me. But we had an extremely
instructive time. I've given an account in that
paper of how we decided we needed cast TNT instead
of flake TNT, and we made it on board the ship by
heating up TNT in an electric coffee pot and
pouring it into paper bowls, and all kinds of
improvisations of the sort. And Ewing was a man
after my own heart, but as I say, I've written about
him, and I owe a great deal to him. And then I went
home, and the next year I went out to sea with a man
called Tom Gaskell, and Ben Brown had been doing
the gravity in submarines. We'd already, before
we met Field, decided to do gravity measurements
for submarines. And we did our first seismic work
on the continental shelf and found these great
thicknesses of sediments, which had also been
found by Ewing over on the east coast of the United
States. And this was the great discovery of the
enormous sedimentary thicknesses, 10, 20, 30,
40,000 feet, some places 10 kilometers of
sediment, which, of course, are the home of the
offshore oil. And it's interesting that the oil
companies at the time were not the least
interested. Ewing tried to get money off an oil
company to look for the thickness of the sediments
off the east coast of the United States. And they
weren't interested at all. The chairman of
Standard Oil simply said, there's plenty of oil in
the Middle East. We can buy the oil we want. There's
a good deal of oil in Texas. We're all right. And
they had no idea what was going to happen. And it
shows the difficulty of prediction. Because
these people weren't foolish. They knew their
business. They were making a lot of money. But you
couldn't see that far ahead that there were going
to be these troubles and you'd need to look for oil
at sea. It's an interesting sidelight, I think, on
the nature of industry before the war. I mean, now
you'd have no trouble at all. I don't think you'd
have much trouble I mean, the minerals companies
now are looking at minerals at sea.
They don't need very much persuading. But then it
was really very different. Well, anyway, we
worked on this up to the war. We got a good section of
the thickness of the sediments out to the edge of
the continental shelf. And we started to turn our
thoughts to all kinds of other things. I got
interested in heat flow, first of all on land. I had
a graduate student working on land. And I went to
South Africa before the war and did measurements
of heat flow in the mines. And I thought of a method
of doing this at sea. I thought of this before the
war, but war came too soon. And so we didn't do it
before the war. Now, how much do you want me to...
Let's stop there. You asked me other questions
about the pre-war period. Right. I don't want to go
into the war until I've come to work with the
submarine. You've already made a comment on how
Cambridge compares today with Cambridge 45 years
ago. Would you see Cambridge now as more
specialised than it was when you went to school
there? No, I think less so. In the sense that if
we're talking about... Are you talking about the
undergraduate course or the sort of things that
graduate students sort of research and so on? Sort
of things graduate students do, really. Well, no,
I think less specialized. You see, at that time,
Rutherford had this single-minded devotion to
the nucleus, nuclear physics. Now, the interest
has broadened a great deal. If one takes a look at
the Cavendish today, they're doing a great
variety of things. They're interested in a great
deal of solid state work, low temperature work,
electron microscopy, all kinds of things. And I
would say that generally, graduate students have
a broader knowledge of what science is about. I
mean lots of them now of course go into biophysics.
This is the big thing that's had this tremendous
development. Earth science, the sort of thing
I've been engaged in, and molecular biology are
the great revolutions of the post-war period and
to some extent astronomy. These are things all on
the periphery of physics. They're not the central
core of particle and nuclear physics, as
Rutherford saw physics. They are things that are
peripheral. And these have had this tremendous
development. And this has, I think, affected
people's whole attitude to science, that now one
looks for the growing points on the periphery of a
subject rather than the central core of it.
physicist you're taking a very big gamble because
you may turn out to be Einstein but you'll probably
spend your time doing rather trivial things in a
very competitive field with a very large number of
other people and students are bored with this a few
I always ask graduate students when they want to
come and work with me why they want to come and work
with me and why they don't do something else And in
the old days, I'm talking about 20 years ago, they
used to say, well, you know, I've come to realize
that I'm not good enough for particle physics or
for solid state physics. And Mr. Somebody or other
advised me to come and see you. Nowadays, they say
something different. I say, why don't you go into
particle physics? They say, it's so dull. I'd like
something that's growing and interesting where I
can make an impression. And of course, also, this
is hitched on to this vague feeling that students
have for what they call relevance. I don't think
they know what they mean by relevance quite. But
they mean something which is connected with what
they see as the real world, what they see as human
interests, particularly human interests in
pollution, the state of the world, energy, all
these things. So I think the attitude of students
has changed. In my day, as a student, it was felt to
be a definitely second best choice not to go into
the central core of physics, the developing study
of the nucleus and of particles. And this has
changed. Is that...? Yeah, yeah. I'm struck by...
by your ability to write, which is rather unusual
for American scientists, if I may say so. Is this a
product of your sort of classical education, or
did you have a classical education? Well, let me
say, I was an extremely unsuccessful schoolboy. I
was, as a small boy, age of 10 or so, I was extremely
disturbed. I don't quite know why. In any case,
it's not relevant to your inquiry. I was unhappy at
home, unhappy at school, for no real reason. And I
got very behind hand, and my parents took me to some
kind of primitive psychiatrist or psychologist,
and he said, take him away from his day school, send
him away to school, to boarding school. And I think
the man must have had in mind that he wanted to get me
out of what was obviously for me a difficult
environment. And I think it was partly the great
anxiety of my parents that I might be a very
low-grade person. My father never believed I
could earn my living. Well, anyway, I went away to
school and quite suddenly I felt released and I was
put into the bottom form two or three years below my
age. And in two, three years, I went right up to the
top of the school. No trouble, no trouble at all.
Most extraordinary transformation. And
curiously enough, an identical thing has just
happened to my grandson, who refused to learn to
write about the age I was in trouble. And his mother
said, Did he do something? So I got him into the same
school. What public school did you go to? I went to
Repton. I went to Repton at the age of 14. And I
disliked it for the first two or three years. Then I
sort of came to terms with it. And it was a good
school in a very old fashioned sense. They didn't
bother much about you. They left you alone. You
could do what you liked. I had strong mathematical
and physical interests. I didn't pay much
attention to anything else. And I was more or less
in a way self-educated. And I suddenly realized
that I could, in fact, no one would worry much what I
did. And I got, in England at that time, there was a
critical exam that you took 16, 17. I was still a bit
behind and I took it at 17. Well, I disliked him
intensely. I'm just telling the story. It shows my
sort of attitude to authority at that time. I took a
dislike to my foremaster. And we quarreled a good
deal. And I remember he asked us to write an essay on
what historical character we'd most like to have
met. And I thought, I'll tell him what I think of
him. So I sat down and I wrote an essay which started
with the reasons for not wishing to meet any of the
historical characters that he admired. I said the
Duke of Wellington and Napoleon were little
better than murderers. A view I don't hold now of
the Duke of Wellington. And went through a list of
all the people he'd held up to us as admirable, and
said I wouldn't have made any of them if I'd been
paid to. And the man I'd have liked to meet was
Faraday. Well, then the man lost his temper over
this, wrote a piece at the bottom, saying, you
beastly little boy, public school education is
thrown away on you. And I had this thing framed and
hung up in my study. And I haven't got it now. I lost
it when I left school. But anyway, I was pleased
with this and thought I was definitely making
progress. And then I came out one from bottom. I was
22nd out of 23 in this form at the end of the year. But
fortunately, the prize for the year was given on
the results of a public examination. in which I
came top. So when the results were read out for all
the school and the parents, the headmaster read
out, Bullard, 22, Snooks, 23, four-prize
Bullard. I thought I'd definitely scored off this
man. I mean, an absolute fool, of course. He got me
bottom of the four. But this is an answer to your
question in the sense that I must have been able to
write, you see, and make things plausible. And the
man was very nice to me. He asked me, the form master
asked me to go around to tea and I went around there
and he said, look, it's clear I've made a mistake
and I hope you don't hold it against me. And we were
good friends after this. But anyway, it was a funny
sort of school, sort of ill-organised, do what you
like. I remember when I was, the next year after
this, I was not in the top form, one from the top
form, and I went in for, it was an engineering
prize, and I went in for it, I thought it would be fun
to, and So I went in for the engineering prize and
came out top. I thought it was nice, I got the prize.
Not a bit of it. The headmaster, who afterwards
became Archbishop of Canterbury, ruled that I was
ineligible because I was in the fifth form and not
in the sixth form, and that the man in the sixth form
who'd come second in the exams would get the prize.
Well, I thought this was a joke. I mean, it seemed to
me funny. I thought the headmaster, who had a
rather perverted sense of humour, disregarded
this as funny and wanted to see how I'd react. And so
I went round to my house master and I told him this as
a joke. I said, you know what Elsans has done? And I
explained. And he said, you know why he's done
this? And I said, no, I suppose he thought it was
funny. No, he said, it's not that. There's a cup for
the house that gets most prizes. And we are neck and
neck with his house. And as a story about an
archbishop, I thought it was instructive. Yes. I
got to know him later on when he was archbishop. I
got to know him a bit. And we were good friends. I
asked him down a few months before he died to give a
talk at Churchill College in Cambridge. He came
and talked to undergraduates. And he chose to talk
on ethics. And he gave the most wonderful talk. He
was the greatest fun. He really was a very
entertaining man. He was the best after-dinner
speaker in England. And really, very good fun.
This is Fisher, Dr. Fisher, Archbishop of
Canterbury. The other memory I have of him is that
we used to have a scripture lesson on Sunday
mornings. And there was some miserable little man
who used to take us to scripture. I remember his
name, but I won't repeat it. Anyway, this was a
shambles. We were supposed to be reading a book,
the book of Isaiah. And we all took in things that
interested us. I remember there was a man took in a
journal called Engineering, which is about the
same size as the Los Angeles Times. I used to sit
reading this in the front row, and I used to scratch
my head about mathematics and so on. We were all
getting on with our own affairs, and Manuel was
running it, obviously didn't mind much what we
did. He read some book of his own. And one day, the
headmaster, Fisher, came in and said he proposed
to hold an examination. We'd all put our books
away, of course, as soon as the capital would go on.
We were wondering how on earth this chap would run
things and get out of this. And he said to
headmaster, you know, the boys are very
interested in Isaiah, and we shan't be able to
finish the book and have an examination. I would
really like them to finish it and not have the
examination. And the headmaster sort of grinned.
He obviously saw what was going on and went out
again. Well, I'm trying to give the picture of a,
entirely disorganized school, see, that went in
this extraordinary way. And then at the end of my
school days, I had to get into Cambridge, and I had
to take a Latin examination. And I hadn't done, I'd
stopped doing Latin when I was about 12 or 13. And so
I read all 14, something of that sort, and I really
didn't know any Latin at all. So I decided, in the
term before this exam, to devote a substantial
amount of time to learning Latin. Then I got
measles. and I wasn't allowed to read, and I was
only left with three weeks to learn Latin. And I
went round to see a man who I knew taught Latin, who I
knew slightly faster, and I said, look, can you
teach me Latin, enough Latin, to get through this
exam in three weeks? Oh, he said, sure, of course,
no problem. He said, come round to me every
evening, and I'll send a bill to your father. And I
said, well, that's all right. And so I went round to
him every evening for about half an hour, First
evening we got in, he said, well now, set for
Horace's odes. Here's the Latin, here's the
English. You learn the English off by heart as far
as you can. You know enough Latin words to know
which ode you've got. And with knowing just a
little Latin, you should be able to pick your way
through. Oh, he said, by the way, don't bother with
these three. They won't ask those. And I said, why
not? Oh, he said, they're obscene. So I said, well,
listen, look, I read the English text. I said, I
can't say anything obscene about them. What's
wrong with them? Oh, he said, you see, that's a
boy's name. They'll never say anything about
buggery to a public school boy. He said, you can
safely omit those.
I mean, by modern standards, very odd system of
education, but it suited me. to be left to my own
devices, so to speak. Well, I think I got
interested in writing properly in this
environment. I mean, it was one of the things that
was highly regarded and which a lot of trouble was
taken about. And later on, Lance Cunningham was
very fussy about how I wrote things, and this man
Jeffreys I talked about. It was a thing which was
not regarded casually. It was regarded... as
perhaps the most important part of education, to
learn to write grammatically correctly. And I
know what's gone wrong with American writing of
students.
You quite properly start off with small children
to teach them that they can express themselves.
You don't bother much how they do it. You tell them
to write about their pet cat or something of this
kind, and you don't much worry whether they spell
cat with K and how it's done. But the trouble is this
goes on all through school and all through
college, that there's a very high value put on
self-expression as against formal correctness
of writing. And I had an interesting example of
this. A young lady in my class here in San Diego
wrote a midterm test which was literally
unintelligible.
sort her out, and said, I can't grade this thing.
And she said, why not? I said, because it doesn't
make any sense. And she said, what do you mean? I
said, well, just read it to me. And we sat down, and
she read it to me. And after a little while, she
said, I said, what do you mean? It doesn't make
sense, does it? I said, no, it doesn't. She said, no
one's ever said this to me before. It's
interesting. They all thought I wrote like I
wrote, and that was that. And I said, well, Look, it
isn't any good, is it? I said, you go away and do two
more questions that I'll give you. Take your time,
do what you like, get anyone's advice you like, ask
your dog, anyone, and come back next week with it.
She came back and got an A. She suddenly realized.
It had never, I think, entered her head that there
was any more problem in writing than there is in
speaking. She thought it was a thing you did
spontaneously, and the first thing that came into
your head was the best way to do it. And I think it is
the realization that writing is an art, is a
conscious effort, which I think your students are
missing. Such a high value is placed on
spontaneity of expression, that the fact that
writing is not, that apparent spontaneity in
writing is obtained with great difficulty, but
People like,
what's the man's name, the man who wrote Ulysses?
Joyce. Joyce, yes. I mean, it's apparently, he's
the source of this kind of thing. It's done with
enormous subtlety, and it's obviously been
rewritten dozens of times. This realization just
hasn't got through. It's the school's fault. They
aren't insisting that people write
intelligibly. Well, anyway, you asked me about
what I thought about writing in America and
England. I think it's just more trouble is taken in
insisting on correct writing. And you think,
then, that you're typical of this product rather
than... I think so. I mean, maybe I've had more
practice than most people. I mean, I've written an
awful lot.
The book... How did you come to invent the
geophonic device you used in your work? I had that
appearing in the 30s in work with Strada. Oh, this
is this... I know what you're talking about.
You're talking about geophones. Yeah. Well, when
we were working on land and seismology, we had no
money. So we had to make our own geophones. I don't
think we invented anything. It was pretty obvious
how to do it. They existed. I mean, there was the
wear seismographs being used by all companies and
so on. And we thought a bit about how they should be
designed and how they were made. And we made one,
and then we had to make one to use at sea. And the
trick about this was it had to work either way up,
because you couldn't determine which way it went
down the sea floor. We started the first year
putting them right way up on the sea bottom, which
is quite a trick. And then we decided that's too
much nuisance and made ones that go either way up. I
was very lucky. I had an extraordinarily clever
assistant. He was a boy who'd left school at 15, had
taken a course in machining. He was a mechanic, a
machinist. And he was about the cleverest man I'd
ever met. And this was a nice thing, at least it was
nice for me in the 20s and 30s, were a whole lot of
people who fell off the educational ladder, who
were extremely intelligent. And the result was
that you could get very intelligent people as
assistants. Whereas now, of course, this man
would have been chairman of General Motors or
something, or a banker, or God knows what he was. In
fact, my mechanic. And I always felt he was much
cleverer than I was. And he did very well during the
war, which is another story we might come to. But he
had no ambition at all. He insisted after the war on
coming back and working as a mechanic. Very
curious. When you go to East Africa, did you
deliberately go there on a scientific
expedition? And if so, who sent you? Well, I sent
myself, essentially. We developed these methods
of measuring gravity with pendulums for
considerable improvement on them. If anyone
wants to know how it was done, they can read the
paper in the philosophical transactions. And
East Africa is a very odd place. Some friends of
mine had been there looking at the Rift Valleys
from a geological point of view, and biologists
and so on. So I knew a little about East Africa. It
was accessible. It was a British colony. The road
system was sufficiently good to travel about in
it. a certain number of height measurements,
which were important. There'd been leveling
along the railway. There'd been a triangulation.
It was just in a sufficiently developed state to do
gravity measuring. A little had been done already
by a German in Tanzania, which was formerly a
German East Africa, a man called . And it has the
rift valleys, which I was interested in. And so I
chose it for its scientific interest plus the
practicability of the project. And I went out with
my wife, and we traveled around in a truck, slept in
the truck, took all the equipment in the truck, and
a couple of natives, who was a cook and his
assistant. And we spent several months there
traveling around. It was really a tremendous trip
around with all this equipment.
Well, so that I mean, one of the things we had to do,
generally speaking, was to build our equipment,
you see, because you couldn't. We had no money to
buy equipment. Now, I always try, if you can buy
equipment, you buy it. And, of course,
equipment's much more available now. The whole
scientific enterprise is so much bigger. And all
the things like cathedrals, scilographs,
analog-digital converters, all these things are
available on a big scale. Well, look, we've only
just, you know, we've been talking about it now,
and we've only just got to the point where I talk
about oceanography.